Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: heat,
temperature and humidity. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. Distinguish heat from temperature.
Heat and temperature are related but fundamentally distinct concepts,
and confusing them is a common error,
so the distinction is worth establishing clearly at the outset.
Heat is a form of energy — thermal energy — that flows from a hotter body to a
cooler one by virtue of their temperature difference; it is measured in joules,
the unit of energy, and the quantity of heat in a body depends on its mass,
its nature and its temperature.
Temperature, by contrast, is not energy but a measure of the average kinetic energy
of the molecules of a substance — how hot or cold it is — and it determines the
direction of heat flow, which is always from higher to lower temperature;
it is measured in kelvin or degrees Celsius.
The distinction is illustrated by considering that a small object at high
temperature, such as a spark, may contain little total heat energy,
while a large object at modest temperature, such as a bath of warm water,
contains a great deal; the spark is hotter but holds less heat.
Temperature thus tells us the intensity of the thermal state and the direction heat
will flow, while heat is the quantity of energy transferred or contained.
This distinction underlies the whole of clinical thermal physics — heat loss and
gain by the patient, the heat capacity of materials, latent heat,
and the measurement of temperature.
So heat is thermal energy measured in joules, flowing from hot to cold,
whereas temperature is a measure of the average molecular kinetic energy that
determines the direction of heat flow — distinct quantities whose difference
underlies all of clinical thermal physics.
Define heat capacity and specific heat capacity, and give their relevance.
Heat capacity and specific heat capacity describe how much heat energy a body or
substance must absorb to change its temperature,
and they are important in understanding both clinical heat loss and the design of
equipment such as vaporisers.
The heat capacity of a body is the quantity of heat required to raise its
temperature by one degree, measured in joules per kelvin;
it depends on both the mass and the nature of the body.
The specific heat capacity is the heat capacity per unit mass — the quantity of
heat required to raise one kilogram of a substance by one kelvin,
measured in joules per kilogram per kelvin — and it is a property of the material
itself.
Water has a notably high specific heat capacity,
which is why it can store and carry large amounts of heat and why the body,
being largely water, has considerable thermal inertia,
resisting rapid temperature change. The clinical relevance is several-fold.
The high heat capacity of the body means that warming a hypothermic patient
requires a large amount of energy and takes time.
The specific heat capacity of materials matters in vaporiser design,
where a material of high heat capacity and conductivity is chosen so that the
vaporiser acts as a heat reservoir,
maintaining a stable temperature despite the cooling of evaporation.
It also explains the heat stored in water-filled humidifiers and warming devices.
So heat capacity is the heat needed to raise a body's temperature by one degree,
and specific heat capacity is that per unit mass — water's being high — which
explains the body's thermal inertia, the energy needed to rewarm a patient,
and the use of high-heat-capacity materials in vaporisers and warming devices.
Explain latent heat, distinguishing fusion and vaporisation.
Latent heat is the energy absorbed or released when a substance changes its
physical state — between solid, liquid and gas — without any change in temperature,
and it is important in anaesthesia because the evaporation of liquids cools them,
affecting cylinders, vaporisers and the patient.
When a substance changes state, energy is required to break or rearrange the bonds
between its molecules, and this energy is taken in or given out at constant
temperature, hence latent, meaning hidden,
because it does not register as a temperature change. There are two kinds.
The latent heat of fusion is the energy required to convert a solid to a liquid,
or released when a liquid freezes, at the melting point.
The latent heat of vaporisation is the energy required to convert a liquid to a
gas, or released when a vapour condenses,
at the boiling point or during evaporation;
it is much larger than the latent heat of fusion,
because converting a liquid to a widely-spaced vapour requires breaking the
intermolecular bonds entirely.
The specific latent heat is this energy per unit mass, in joules per kilogram.
The clinical relevance is that evaporation,
requiring latent heat drawn from the surroundings, produces cooling:
the latent heat of vaporisation cools a nitrous oxide cylinder as it empties,
cools the liquid in an anaesthetic vaporiser,
and cools the patient through evaporation from skin, airway and surgical surfaces.
So latent heat is the energy of a change of state at constant temperature — of
fusion for solid to liquid, and the larger of vaporisation for liquid to gas — and
because evaporation draws latent heat from its surroundings it produces the cooling
seen in cylinders, vaporisers and the patient.
Describe the mechanisms of heat transfer.
Heat is transferred between bodies by four mechanisms,
and understanding them is essential to understanding how the anaesthetised patient
loses heat and how we may prevent or reverse that loss.
The first is conduction, the transfer of heat through direct molecular contact
between a body and a cooler object touching it,
the rate depending on the temperature difference and the thermal conductivity of
the materials; the patient loses heat by conduction to a cold operating table or
cold fluids, though this is normally a small contribution unless contact is
extensive.
The second is convection, the transfer of heat by the movement of a fluid — air or
liquid — carrying heat away from a surface;
warm air rising from the patient is replaced by cooler air,
continually removing heat, and this is increased by air currents in the theatre.
Convection is normally a major route of loss.
The third is radiation, the emission of heat as infrared electromagnetic waves from
any warm surface to cooler surroundings, requiring no contact or medium;
radiation to the cold surfaces of the theatre is typically the largest single route
of perioperative heat loss.
The fourth is evaporation, the loss of heat as the latent heat of vaporisation when
water evaporates from the skin, the respiratory tract and exposed surgical
surfaces; this includes insensible losses and is increased by exposed viscera and
by dry anaesthetic gases.
So heat is transferred by conduction through contact, convection by fluid movement,
radiation as infrared waves, and evaporation drawing latent heat — radiation and
convection being the major perioperative routes,
with evaporation and conduction contributing — and all four must be addressed to
keep the patient warm.
Apply these to perioperative heat loss and its prevention.
Perioperative hypothermia is a common and important complication,
and applying the physics of heat transfer explains both why it occurs and how it is
prevented.
The anaesthetised patient is vulnerable for several reasons:
anaesthesia impairs thermoregulation,
abolishing behavioural responses and blunting vasoconstriction and shivering;
the patient is exposed in a cool theatre;
and the initial fall in temperature after induction is dominated by an internal
redistribution of heat from the warm core to the cooler periphery,
as anaesthesia causes vasodilatation.
Thereafter heat is lost to the environment by the four mechanisms in roughly
descending order of radiation, convection, evaporation and conduction.
The consequences of hypothermia are significant — increased surgical site
infection, coagulopathy and bleeding, delayed drug metabolism,
patient discomfort and shivering with raised oxygen demand, and cardiac morbidity.
Prevention is directed at each mechanism.
Radiation and convection are reduced by warming the theatre and by forced-air
warming blankets, which blow warmed air over the patient,
the single most effective measure, addressing the major routes.
Conduction is reduced by warming mattresses and by warming intravenous and
irrigation fluids. Evaporation is reduced by humidifying inspired gases,
covering exposed surfaces and limiting exposure.
Pre-warming the patient before induction reduces the redistribution loss.
Temperature should be monitored throughout.
So perioperative hypothermia arises from anaesthetic impairment of
thermoregulation, initial redistribution, and loss by radiation, convection,
evaporation and conduction, and it is prevented by forced-air warming,
fluid warming, humidification, covering and pre-warming,
with monitoring throughout — measures rationally targeted at the mechanisms of heat
transfer.
Now let us turn to humidity. Define absolute and relative humidity.
Humidity is the amount of water vapour present in a gas,
and it is expressed in two distinct ways — absolute and relative humidity — both of
which are important in anaesthesia for understanding the conditioning of inspired
gases and the function of humidification devices.
Absolute humidity is the actual mass of water vapour present in a given volume of
gas, expressed in grams per cubic metre, or sometimes as the mass per litre;
it is a direct measure of the water content.
Relative humidity, by contrast, is a ratio — the mass of water vapour actually
present in a gas compared with the maximum mass it could hold at that temperature
if fully saturated, expressed as a percentage;
equivalently it is the ratio of the actual water vapour pressure to the saturated
vapour pressure at that temperature.
The crucial point linking them is that the maximum amount of water a gas can hold
rises steeply with temperature, so a gas that is fully saturated,
at one hundred per cent relative humidity,
holds far more water when warm than when cold.
Thus fully saturated gas at room temperature holds about seventeen grams per cubic
metre, whereas fully saturated gas at body temperature holds about forty-four grams
per cubic metre.
This temperature dependence explains why cooling a saturated gas causes
condensation, and why warming a gas lowers its relative humidity even though its
absolute water content is unchanged.
So absolute humidity is the actual mass of water vapour per unit volume,
while relative humidity is the percentage of the maximum the gas could hold at that
temperature — and because that maximum rises steeply with temperature,
the two must be distinguished, particularly when gases are warmed or cooled.
Explain saturated vapour pressure and the dew point.
Saturated vapour pressure and the dew point are two related concepts that follow
from the behaviour of water vapour in a gas,
and they underlie both humidity measurement and the condensation seen in breathing
systems.
The saturated vapour pressure of water is the partial pressure exerted by water
vapour when a gas is fully saturated — holding the maximum amount of water vapour
possible at that temperature, in equilibrium with liquid water.
Its defining feature is that it depends only on temperature,
rising steeply as temperature increases,
and being independent of the total pressure or the presence of other gases.
At body temperature the saturated vapour pressure of water is about six point three
kilopascals, an important figure because it represents the water vapour pressure of
fully humidified alveolar gas, which must be accounted for when calculating
alveolar gas tensions.
The dew point is the temperature to which a gas must be cooled for it to become
fully saturated with its existing water content — that is,
for the water vapour present to reach its saturated vapour pressure;
cooling below the dew point causes the excess water to condense out as liquid.
This explains the condensation, or fogging and water droplets,
seen in cool parts of the breathing system and on the inside of a facemask,
where warm saturated expired gas is cooled below its dew point.
The dew point is also the basis of one method of measuring humidity.
So saturated vapour pressure is the temperature-dependent pressure of water vapour
in a fully saturated gas, about six point three kilopascals at body temperature,
and the dew point is the temperature at which a gas becomes saturated and below
which water condenses — concepts underlying humidity measurement and condensation
in breathing systems.
How is humidity measured?
Humidity is measured by several methods, collectively the province of hygrometry,
ranging from simple mechanical devices to precise laboratory and electronic
instruments, each based on a physical principle.
The hair hygrometer exploits the property that a hair lengthens as humidity rises;
the change in length moves a pointer over a scale,
giving a simple but only approximate measure of relative humidity.
The wet-and-dry-bulb hygrometer uses two thermometers,
one with its bulb kept moist by a wick;
evaporation from the wet bulb cools it by latent heat,
and the difference between the two thermometer readings depends on the relative
humidity — the drier the air, the greater the evaporation and the larger the
difference — which is read from tables.
Regnault's hygrometer measures the dew point directly:
air is bubbled through ether in a silver tube to cool it until condensation just
appears on the tube's surface, the temperature at which this occurs being the dew
point, from which humidity is calculated.
Modern electronic methods are most used clinically:
the capacitance or resistance of a humidity-sensitive polymer changes with the
water vapour it absorbs, allowing rapid, accurate electronic measurement,
as used in many anaesthetic and environmental monitors.
Mass spectrometry and other gas-analysis techniques can also measure water vapour.
So humidity is measured by the hair hygrometer,
the wet-and-dry-bulb hygrometer using evaporative cooling,
Regnault's hygrometer measuring the dew point, and,
most usefully in clinical practice,
electronic transducers whose capacitance or resistance changes with absorbed water
vapour.
Why must inspired anaesthetic gases be humidified, and what happens if they are not?
The humidification of inspired gases is an important consideration in anaesthesia,
because the medical gases we deliver are essentially dry,
and bypassing the normal humidifying function of the upper airway has consequences
that must be understood and mitigated.
Normally, inspired air is warmed and humidified as it passes over the moist mucosa
of the nose, mouth and pharynx, so that by the time it reaches the trachea and
alveoli it is at body temperature and fully saturated,
about forty-four grams of water per cubic metre.
The cylinder and pipeline gases we deliver, however,
are anhydrous — completely dry — and during anaesthesia the upper airway is
frequently bypassed by a tracheal tube or supraglottic airway,
so dry gas is delivered directly to the lower airway.
The consequences of delivering dry, cold gas are several.
The respiratory mucosa is dried, impairing the function of the cilia and the
mucociliary escalator, leading to retained, thickened secretions, mucus plugging,
and impaired clearance, with a risk of atelectasis and infection;
over time the epithelium may be damaged.
Heat is lost from the airway both directly and as the latent heat needed to
humidify the dry gas, contributing to hypothermia.
These effects are most significant during long procedures,
in children with their higher relative ventilation, and in intensive care.
Therefore inspired gases are humidified, by passive or active means.
So inspired anaesthetic gases must be humidified because they are dry and the
humidifying upper airway is often bypassed,
and delivering dry gas dries the mucosa,
impairs ciliary clearance causing secretion retention and atelectasis,
and loses heat — consequences that warrant humidification,
particularly in long cases, children and intensive care.
Describe the methods of humidifying inspired gases.
Inspired gases may be humidified by several methods,
broadly divided into passive and active devices, each with its principles,
advantages and limitations.
The simplest and most widely used is the heat and moisture exchanger,
a passive device placed between the breathing system and the patient.
It contains a hygroscopic or condenser element that, during expiration,
captures the heat and moisture of the warm saturated expired gas,
and during the next inspiration returns them to the dry inspired gas,
recycling the patient's own heat and humidity.
It is simple, cheap, requires no external energy or water,
and many incorporate a filter; its limitations are that it adds some dead space and
resistance, achieves only partial humidification,
and may become obstructed by secretions.
Active humidifiers add heat and water from an external source.
The hot-water bath humidifier passes the inspired gas over or through a heated
reservoir of water, so that it is warmed and saturated;
the gas leaves fully humidified, and the degree is controlled by the water
temperature, though care is needed to avoid overheating,
condensation in the tubing, and microbial contamination,
and heated wire circuits are used to prevent rain-out.
Nebulisers add humidity as a suspension of fine water droplets rather than vapour,
produced by a gas jet or by ultrasonic vibration,
and can deliver more than fully saturated vapour.
So inspired gases are humidified passively by the heat and moisture exchanger,
which recycles expired heat and moisture,
and actively by hot-water bath humidifiers,
which warm and saturate the gas from an external reservoir, and by nebulisers,
which add water as fine droplets — each balancing effectiveness against complexity,
dead space and infection risk.
Explain boiling point and the effect of pressure upon it.
The boiling point of a liquid, and its dependence on the ambient pressure,
is a concept with relevance to the behaviour of anaesthetic agents and to
physiology at altitude.
The boiling point is the temperature at which the saturated vapour pressure of a
liquid equals the surrounding atmospheric pressure,
so that vaporisation occurs throughout the liquid, not merely at its surface,
and bubbles of vapour form.
Because boiling occurs when the saturated vapour pressure reaches the ambient
pressure, and the saturated vapour pressure rises with temperature,
the boiling point depends on the ambient pressure:
if the ambient pressure is reduced, a lower vapour pressure,
and hence a lower temperature, suffices for boiling, so the boiling point falls;
if the ambient pressure is raised, the boiling point rises.
This is why water boils at a lower temperature at altitude,
where atmospheric pressure is reduced,
and at a higher temperature in a pressure cooker or autoclave,
where pressure is raised — the raised boiling point of the autoclave being
precisely what allows it to reach the temperatures needed to sterilise.
For anaesthetic agents, the boiling point matters in vaporiser design:
desflurane has a boiling point close to room temperature,
about twenty-three degrees, so that it would boil unpredictably in a conventional
vaporiser, which is why it requires a special heated, pressurised vaporiser.
So the boiling point is the temperature at which a liquid's saturated vapour
pressure equals the ambient pressure,
and it falls with reduced pressure and rises with increased pressure — explaining
boiling at altitude and in autoclaves,
and the special vaporiser needed for desflurane,
whose boiling point is near room temperature.
What is the triple point, and is it relevant to measurement?
The triple point is a precisely defined physical state of a substance,
and although somewhat theoretical, it is relevant because it has historically
underpinned the definition of the temperature scale.
The triple point of a substance is the unique combination of temperature and
pressure at which all three phases — solid,
liquid and gas — coexist in equilibrium together.
For any pure substance this occurs at one exactly reproducible temperature and
pressure, which makes it valuable as a fixed reference point,
because it can be reproduced anywhere with great precision, unlike, say,
a melting or boiling point which varies with pressure.
The triple point of water, occurring at a temperature just above zero degrees
Celsius and a low pressure, was for many years used to define the kelvin:
the kelvin was defined such that the triple point of water was exactly two hundred
and seventy-three point one six kelvin, providing a fixed,
reproducible anchor for the absolute temperature scale.
In the most recent redefinition of the SI,
the kelvin has been redefined in terms of a fundamental constant,
the Boltzmann constant, rather than the triple point of water,
but the triple point remains an important and highly reproducible calibration
reference for thermometry.
So the triple point is the unique temperature and pressure at which the solid,
liquid and gas phases of a substance coexist, exactly reproducible,
and the triple point of water historically defined the kelvin and remains a precise
reference for the calibration of thermometers.
Briefly outline the principles by which temperature is measured,
reserving the detail for a later station.
Temperature is measured by a range of devices,
each exploiting a physical property that changes reproducibly with temperature,
and although the detail belongs to a dedicated station on temperature measurement,
the principles are worth outlining here.
The oldest devices are expansion thermometers,
which rely on the thermal expansion of a substance:
the mercury or alcohol thermometer uses the expansion of a liquid in a fine glass
capillary; the bimetallic strip uses the differential expansion of two bonded
metals to move a pointer.
These are simple but slow and unsuitable for continuous clinical monitoring.
The electrical devices, which dominate modern clinical practice,
respond quickly and can be read remotely.
The resistance thermometer uses the rise in the electrical resistance of a metal,
such as platinum, with temperature, giving an accurate and linear measure.
The thermistor uses a semiconductor bead whose resistance falls markedly and
non-linearly with temperature, giving a small, rapid,
sensitive probe ideal for clinical use.
The thermocouple uses the small voltage generated at the junction of two dissimilar
metals, which varies with temperature — the Seebeck effect — allowing a tiny,
fast probe.
Infrared thermometers detect the thermal radiation emitted by a surface,
as in the tympanic membrane thermometer, allowing non-contact measurement.
Each has its accuracy, speed of response and appropriate clinical site.
So temperature is measured by the thermal expansion of liquids and metals in simple
thermometers, and, in modern clinical practice,
by electrical devices — the resistance thermometer,
the thermistor and the thermocouple — and by infrared detection of emitted
radiation, the principles I shall expand upon in the dedicated station.
What are the consequences of hypothermia and, conversely,
of hyperthermia in the perioperative period?
Disturbances of body temperature in either direction have important perioperative
consequences, and the anaesthetist must understand both to justify the effort of
maintaining normothermia. Hypothermia, even mild,
carries a substantial burden of harm.
It impairs coagulation, reducing platelet function and slowing the enzymatic
clotting cascade, increasing blood loss and transfusion requirements.
It increases the rate of surgical site infection,
by impairing immune function and reducing wound oxygen delivery through
vasoconstriction. It slows the metabolism of anaesthetic drugs and muscle
relaxants, prolonging their effect and delaying recovery.
It causes shivering on emergence, which is distressing and greatly increases oxygen
consumption and cardiac demand, hazardous in patients with cardiac disease,
and it is associated with adverse cardiac events.
It causes patient discomfort and may impair wound healing.
Conversely, hyperthermia is also harmful:
it raises the metabolic rate and oxygen demand, causes tachycardia and fluid loss,
and at extremes causes organ dysfunction.
Importantly, a rise in temperature may signal a serious problem — sepsis,
a transfusion reaction, an overactive warming device, or, critically,
malignant hyperthermia, a rare but life-threatening pharmacogenetic reaction to
triggering anaesthetic agents in which a hypermetabolic state causes a rapid,
dangerous temperature rise requiring immediate recognition and treatment.
So hypothermia causes coagulopathy, infection, delayed drug metabolism,
shivering and cardiac risk, while hyperthermia raises metabolic demand and may
signal sepsis, transfusion reaction or malignant hyperthermia — both warranting
vigilant temperature monitoring and active management to maintain normothermia.
Describe the physics of the principal patient-warming devices.
The devices used to warm patients and fluids each apply the principles of heat
transfer we have discussed, and understanding their physics explains their
effectiveness and limitations.
Forced-air warming, the most effective and widely used device,
consists of a blower that heats air and delivers it through a disposable blanket
perforated on its under-surface, so that warm air is blown over the patient's skin.
It works principally by reducing radiant and convective loss and by adding heat by
convection, addressing the major routes of loss,
and is highly effective at maintaining and restoring normothermia.
Conductive warming devices, such as warming mattresses and resistive-heating
blankets, transfer heat by conduction through direct contact with the patient;
they are useful, though contact area limits them.
Fluid warmers heat intravenous and irrigation fluids before they reach the patient,
preventing the considerable heat loss that occurs when large volumes of cold fluid
are infused — a unit of cold fluid can absorb significant body heat;
they work by passing the fluid through a heated element or counter-current warmer,
and are essential during large-volume resuscitation and transfusion.
Radiant warmers, used especially for neonates,
transfer heat by infrared radiation from an overhead source.
Humidification of inspired gases reduces evaporative and respiratory heat loss.
Each device targets one or more mechanisms of heat transfer,
and they are often combined.
So patient-warming devices apply the physics of heat transfer:
forced-air warmers add convective heat and reduce radiant loss;
conductive mattresses warm by contact;
fluid warmers prevent loss from infused fluids; radiant warmers heat by infrared;
and humidifiers reduce respiratory loss — combined to maintain normothermia.
Finally, draw together the relevance of heat,
temperature and humidity to anaesthetic practice.
Drawing the station together, the physics of heat,
temperature and humidity pervades anaesthetic practice,
underlying the maintenance of the patient's thermal environment,
the conditioning of inspired gases, and the function of much of our equipment.
The fundamental distinction is between heat, thermal energy measured in joules,
and temperature, a measure of molecular kinetic energy that determines the
direction of heat flow. From these flow the practical themes.
Heat capacity and specific heat capacity explain the body's thermal inertia and the
design of vaporisers and warming devices. Latent heat,
drawn from the surroundings by evaporation, cools cylinders,
vaporisers and the patient.
The four mechanisms of heat transfer — conduction, convection,
radiation and evaporation — explain perioperative heat loss and dictate its
prevention by forced-air warming, fluid warming, humidification and covering,
while normothermia matters because hypothermia causes coagulopathy, infection,
delayed recovery, shivering and cardiac risk.
On the humidity side, the distinction of absolute and relative humidity,
the temperature dependence of saturated vapour pressure,
and the dew point explain the need to humidify the dry,
airway-bypassing medical gases, achieved by heat and moisture exchangers and active
humidifiers to protect the mucosa and conserve heat.
Boiling point and its pressure dependence inform vaporiser design and sterilisation.
So heat, temperature and humidity are not abstract thermal physics but the working
principles behind keeping the patient warm, conditioning the gases they breathe,
and operating our vaporisers, humidifiers and warming devices — a foundation
central to safe perioperative care.
Outline the body's own thermoregulation and how anaesthesia disturbs it.
The body normally regulates its core temperature within a remarkably narrow range
about a set-point, and understanding this physiological control explains why
anaesthesia so readily causes hypothermia.
Thermoregulation is coordinated by the hypothalamus,
which receives thermal information from peripheral and central thermoreceptors and
compares it against a set-point of about thirty-seven degrees.
When the temperature deviates, the hypothalamus triggers responses to restore it.
Against cold, it produces vasoconstriction to reduce cutaneous heat loss,
shivering and non-shivering thermogenesis to generate heat,
and behavioural responses such as seeking warmth; against heat,
it produces vasodilatation and sweating to lose heat.
Crucially, these responses are triggered only when the temperature crosses
thresholds a little above and below the set-point,
the small gap between the cold and warm response thresholds being the
interthreshold range, normally only a few tenths of a degree,
within which no response occurs.
General anaesthesia disturbs this system profoundly:
it abolishes behavioural responses, impairs central control,
and greatly widens the interthreshold range,
so that the patient tolerates a much larger swing of temperature before defending
against it — effectively becoming poikilothermic over a wide range.
It also causes vasodilatation, driving the initial redistribution of heat from core
to periphery. Regional anaesthesia similarly impairs responses in the blocked
region.
So thermoregulation is a hypothalamic set-point system defending core temperature
by vasomotor, shivering and behavioural responses outside a narrow interthreshold
range, and anaesthesia causes hypothermia by abolishing behaviour,
widening the interthreshold range and causing vasodilatation with core-to-periphery
redistribution.
Describe the sites used for measuring core temperature and their reliability.
Accurate measurement of core temperature is essential to detecting and managing
perioperative temperature disturbance,
and the various sites available differ in how faithfully they reflect true core
temperature and in their practicality.
The true core temperature is best represented by the blood in the great vessels and
heart. The pulmonary artery, sampled by a thermistor on a pulmonary artery
catheter, is the gold standard, but is invasive and reserved for patients already
requiring such monitoring.
The distal oesophagus, behind the heart,
gives an excellent and practical estimate of core temperature in the anaesthetised
patient and is widely used, provided the probe is correctly positioned.
The nasopharynx, close to the brain and carotid blood,
is also reliable if well placed.
The tympanic membrane, sharing its blood supply with the hypothalamus,
reflects core temperature well when measured by a contact probe,
though the common infrared aural thermometers are less reliable.
The bladder, by a thermistor on a urinary catheter,
tracks core temperature when urine flow is adequate.
The rectum reflects core temperature but lags behind rapid changes and may be
affected by faeces.
Skin and axillary temperatures are peripheral,
reading lower than core and varying with vasomotor state,
so they require correction or are used only for trends.
The site is chosen for the clinical situation,
oesophageal and nasopharyngeal probes being most practical under general
anaesthesia.
So core temperature is best measured at the pulmonary artery, distal oesophagus,
nasopharynx or tympanic membrane, with the bladder and rectum lagging and skin
sites peripheral — the oesophagus and nasopharynx being the practical choices
during anaesthesia.
Explain thermal conductivity and insulation as they apply to keeping the patient
warm.
Thermal conductivity and its converse, insulation,
govern the rate at which heat passes through materials by conduction,
and they are relevant both to heat loss from the patient and to the passive
measures used to retain heat.
Thermal conductivity is a property of a material describing how readily it conducts
heat: metals have high conductivity, conducting heat rapidly,
which is why a metal surface feels cold as it draws heat from the skin,
whereas air, foam and fabrics have low conductivity and so act as insulators,
impeding heat flow.
Insulation works largely by trapping a layer of still air, itself a poor conductor,
and by preventing convective movement of that air.
Applied to the patient, passive insulation reduces heat loss by conduction,
convection and radiation: a single layer of an insulating blanket,
drape or reflective covering can reduce heat loss appreciably by trapping still air
against the skin and reflecting radiant heat,
though adding further layers gives diminishing returns since most of the benefit
comes from the first layer that establishes the still-air boundary.
Reflective space blankets reduce radiant loss specifically.
Passive measures alone, however, only slow loss and cannot add heat,
so they are insufficient to prevent hypothermia in prolonged surgery and must be
supplemented by active warming.
Covering the head, a significant site of loss, is worthwhile.
So thermal conductivity determines heat flow through materials,
insulators such as trapped air, fabric and reflective coverings reducing
conductive, convective and radiant loss,
with most benefit from the first layer — passive measures that slow but cannot
reverse heat loss and so supplement, rather than replace, active warming.
What are the moisture requirements and hazards of humidification devices?
In selecting and using humidification devices,
the anaesthetist must consider both the moisture output required to protect the
airway and the hazards that the devices may introduce,
so a brief account of these is warranted.
The aim of humidification is to deliver inspired gas at a temperature and water
content approaching that of normal alveolar gas — fully saturated at body
temperature, about forty-four grams of water per cubic metre — though a more modest
output suffices to protect the mucosa,
and a minimum absolute humidity of around thirty grams per cubic metre is a common
target for long-term ventilation.
Heat and moisture exchangers achieve a partial output,
typically returning around two-thirds of this, adequate for routine anaesthesia,
while active hot-water humidifiers can achieve full saturation.
The hazards differ by device.
Heat and moisture exchangers add dead space,
which matters particularly in small children, and add resistance to breathing,
and may become occluded by secretions or condensate,
increasing resistance dangerously.
Active hot-water humidifiers carry the risks of overheating and scalding the airway
if the temperature is not controlled,
of condensation or rain-out collecting in the tubing and posing an infection and
aspiration risk, of microbial colonisation of the warm water reservoir,
and of overhydration, particularly in small patients.
Nebulisers can deliver excess water and may carry infection.
All require correct assembly, monitoring and infection control.
So humidification aims to deliver an adequate water content,
partial from heat and moisture exchangers and full from active humidifiers,
while their hazards — added dead space and resistance and occlusion for exchangers,
and scalding, condensation, infection and overhydration for active humidifiers —
must be recognised and managed.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Heat is thermal energy (joules) flowing from hot to cold;
temperature is a measure of average molecular kinetic energy (kelvin/Celsius) that
determines the direction of heat flow - distinct quantities.
Specific heat capacity (high for water) gives the body thermal inertia and
underlies vaporiser and warming-device design.
Second, Latent heat is the energy of a change of state at constant temperature
(vaporisation much greater than fusion);
because evaporation draws latent heat from its surroundings it cools nitrous oxide
cylinders, vaporiser liquid and the patient.
Third, Heat is transferred by conduction (contact), convection (fluid movement),
radiation (infrared waves) and evaporation (latent heat) - radiation and convection
being the major perioperative routes;
hypothermia (from anaesthetic thermoregulatory impairment,
redistribution and these losses) causes coagulopathy, infection, delayed recovery,
shivering and cardiac risk, prevented by forced-air warming, fluid warming,
humidification and covering.
Fourth, Absolute humidity is the actual water vapour mass per volume;
relative humidity is the percentage of the maximum at that temperature - and that
maximum rises steeply with temperature (about 17 g/m3 at room temperature versus 44
g/m3 at body temperature when saturated),
so cooling saturated gas causes condensation (the dew point).
Fifth, Dry, airway-bypassing medical gases must be humidified to protect ciliary
clearance and conserve heat - passively by heat and moisture exchangers (recycling
expired heat and moisture) or actively by hot-water bath humidifiers and
nebulisers; boiling point (where saturated vapour pressure equals ambient pressure)
falls at altitude and rises in autoclaves,
and is near room temperature for desflurane (hence its special heated vaporiser).
Thank you. That concludes the station.